---
id: 260
title: 'Books I read in 1388'
date: '2016-12-14T04:55:58-04:30'
author: adamb924
layout: post
guid: 'http://pretense.adambaker.org/?p=260'
categories:
    - Books
    - 'Books I read'
---

*Midway through the solar Persian year of 1388, I started keeping tracks of the books that I read (in connection with [this discipline](https://pretense.adambaker.org/?p=96)). Motivated party by nostalgia, partly by a desire to see what stuck with me, and partly by pretentiousness, I’ve decided to go over my lists. This list begins in alphabetical order, because I only started keeping track midway through 1388, so I listed all the books I had read up to that point.*

- - - - - -

- Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
- A Child’s History of England—My first voluntary Dickens book. Charming; probably whiggish.
- Diggers in the Earth—surprisingly fascinating.
- Frankenstein—Great literature; so much more than a monster story.
- Gulliver’s Travels
- Ivanhoe—Very good.
- Little Women—Sweet… treacly sweet.
- Orthodoxy
- Peter and Wendy
- Phastastes—My first foray into George MacDonald. I reread it recently because I couldn’t remember the plot. But there is no plot, just George MacDonald’s fertile imagination.
- The Pilgrim’s Progress—Heavy-handed moralizing, terrible fiction. My first intimation that C.S. Lewis and I have different taste.
- Pride and Prejudice—Not as good as the 1996 BBC original. 😉
- Robinson Crusoe—Great story; difficult prose.
- The Sign of the Four—Holmes! So I was in my late 20s before I got into this.
- Sketch of Handel and Beethoven
- A Study in Scarlet
- Thomas Wingfold, Curate—Really wonderful moral novel.
- The Time Machine
- On the Incarnation—I know I had read this before, so this was a (fully justified!) re-reading.
- The Resurrection of the Son of God—Intellectually formative. I read about a hundred pages and ordered the earlier two books in the series.
- Kingdom and Promise
- Why is there something rather than nothing?—Great popular-level discussion of philosophical questions.
- Language documentation
- Henry VI, Part 2—This is when I decided to finish up Shakespeare’s histories. There’s a reason you don’t hear much about Henry VI.
- Henry VI, Part 3
- Life of Anthony
- Tricks of the Trade—Provides wonderful intuition about qualitative research.
- The Spirit of the Disciplines—Easily my favorite Willard book; far better than *The Divine Conspiracy*.
- Cultures &amp; Organizations—Principal component analysis of cultural variables; what’s not to love?
- A Practical View—This book, written by William Wilberforce, sounds like one I’d like to read. I can’t remember a thing about it.
- Descent into hell—My first Charles Williams book. Mind-bender! I’d like to re-read it.
- Richard III—My reward for making it through the Henry VI’s.
- Please Understand Me II—I don’t recall the merits of the book; I’m a big fan of Meyers-Briggs in general. (I’m a textbook INTJ.)
- Now, Discover Your Strengths
- A Thousand Splendid Suns—If his first wasn’t exploitative enough for you….
- A Manual of Literacy for Preliterate Peoples
- Descent into Chaos—Interesting subject matter, horrible analysis.
- Emma
- Silmarillion—Very difficult to care about.